Comparing Fuzzy Rule Based Approaches
for Music Genre Classification
Frederik Heerde1,2 , Igor Vatolkin1(B) , and Günter Rudolph1
1
Department of Computer Science, TU Dortmund, Dortmund, Germany
{Frederik.Heerde,Igor.Vatolkin,Guenter.Rudolph}@tu-dortmund.de
2
QuinScape GmbH, Dortmund, Germany
Abstract. Most of the studies on music genre classiﬁcation are focused
on classiﬁcation quality only. However, listeners and musicologists would
favor comprehensible models, which describe semantic properties of gen-
res like instrument or chord statistics, instead of complex black-box
transforms of signal features either manually engineered or learned by
neural networks. Fuzzy rules – until now not a widely applied method
in music classiﬁcation – oﬀer the advantage of understandability for end
users, in particular in combination with carefully designed semantic fea-
tures. In this work, we tune and compare three approaches which operate
on fuzzy rules: a complete search of primitive rules, an evolutionary app-
roach, and fuzzy pattern trees. Additionally, we include random forest
classiﬁer as a baseline. The experiments were conducted on an artist-
ﬁltered subset of the 1517-Artists database, for which 245 semantic prop-
erties describing instruments, moods, singing style, melody, harmony,
inﬂuence on listener, and eﬀects were extracted to train the classiﬁca-
tion models.
Keywords: Fuzzy rule bases · Music genre recognition · Semantic
features
1
Introduction
Fuzzy sets, ﬁrst introduced in [15], extend classical sets by allowing elements to
be their members to a certain degree μ. This makes it possible to express concepts
mathematically that have ambiguous transitions. Furthermore, they serve as a
basis for fuzzy logic, whose fuzzy statements, such as “Tempo is high”, have a
degree of truth between 1 (true) and 0 (false). Fuzzy statements can be negated
and combined with fuzzy operators. In this work, we use not, and, or, and
avg, a special case of an operator proposed in [6] that calculates the average
degree of truth of two fuzzy statements. We examine three fuzzy rule based
classiﬁcation approaches and apply them to music genre recognition. During the
training stage, they build a set of fuzzy rules for every genre. Together, these sets
form the rule base. The rules consist of a fuzzy statement as premise and a genre
as conclusion, e.g., “If Mood Reﬂective is very high then Jazz”. A prediction
c Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020

J. Romero et al. (Eds.): EvoMUSART 2020, LNCS 12103, pp. 35–48, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-43859-3_336
F. Heerde et al.
is made by determining the genre for which the premises of its rules yield the
highest degree of truth on average.
Because predictions based on fuzzy rules can be expressed in natural lan-
guage, the classiﬁcation models can be very comprehensible, as long as the used
features are understandable as well. This is an advantage over other classiﬁers
with complex black-box models and makes fuzzy rules favorable for end users.
On the other side, these features cannot always be robustly extracted from com-
plex polyphonic audio signals. Still, it was shown in [9] that high-level features
are a good basis for classiﬁcation. Furthermore, rule bases can be easily modiﬁed
on request by music experts.
We compare three fuzzy rule based classiﬁcation approaches. The ﬁrst app-
roach from [13] is a complete search that calculates a relevance measure for every
possible primitive rule and uses the most relevant rules for classiﬁcation. The
second approach, called fuzzy pattern trees [11], constructs one fuzzy rule per
genre iteratively in a tree like manner. The third approach is a modiﬁcation
from an evolutionary algorithm proposed in [8]. It generates random rule bases
and optimizes them via mutation and recombination. In our experiments, we
compare these methods with a random forest classiﬁer as a baseline. To ensure
interpretability, we classify genres only based on semantic mid-level features like
instruments, harmonic properties, predicted moods, etc.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. First, Sect. 2 outlines
the work related to ours. In Sect. 3, we explain the operating principles of the
investigated algorithms. The experiments are presented in Sect. 4. Lastly, we
draw a conclusion in Sect. 5.
2
Related Work
When using primitive fuzzy rules in the rule base, a complete search can be
executed, as shown in [13]. They established a measure for the relevance of one
rule. All possible primitive rules were sorted according to this measure in an
descending order. When classifying, they used the m most relevant primitive
rules, where the optimal m needed to be determined. This is not feasible for
rule bases with complex rules, though, as the number of possibilities increase
drastically.
An interesting alternative are fuzzy pattern trees, that were originally pro-
posed in [6] and further explored in [10,11]. By constructing the rules incremen-
tally and only keeping track of the most promising ones, the number of possible
rules to evaluate was greatly reduced as opposed to a complete search.
Furthermore, there are numerous evolutionary approaches to build fuzzy rule
bases. They diﬀer in the representation of the algorithm’s solution, or individ-
ual. For example, in both [5] and [1], an evolutionary algorithm was proposed, in
which individuals represent single rules. However, their approaches diﬀer in the
way they form the rule base from the result of the algorithm. [5] followed an iter-
ative approach, in which an evolutionary algorithm generates one rule at a time,
which is added to the rule base. After each iteration, a boosting algorithm givesComparing Fuzzy Rule Based Approaches for Music Genre Classiﬁcation
37
more weight to the training examples that the current rule base misclassiﬁes.
This aﬀects the ﬁtness function used by the evolutionary algorithm to enforce a
rule that covers the misclassiﬁed training examples better. In contrast, the algo-
rithm in [1] used the best population as a rule base. To prevent homogeneous
rule bases, they incorporated a measure for diversity in their ﬁtness function.
Afterwards, they simpliﬁed the rule bases by removing redundant rules. An indi-
vidual can also be interpreted as the whole rule base, as seen in [8]. This is also
the approach we chose as a basis for ours.
The fuzzy sets that are used to fuzzify feature values can be optimized after
the model was trained, as done with a genetic algorithm in [3,4].
Apart from fuzzy rule based approaches, there exist also fuzzy classiﬁcation
methods, in which models assign a degree of membership to each class instead of
making a crisp prediction. Here, we give a few examples related to music classi-
ﬁcation. In [14], a fuzzy k-NN classiﬁer and a fuzzy Nearest-Mean classiﬁer were
applied for the fuzzy classiﬁcation of music to emotions. In [7], a modiﬁcation
of the fuzzy C-Means clustering algorithm was used to group pieces of music
by genre in the feature space. Calculating the distance to each cluster centroid
results in the wanted degrees of membership to each class.
3Methodology
3.1Random Forest
As a baseline, we included random forest (RF) in our experiments. This classi-
ﬁcation algorithm was proposed in [2] and is an ensemble of small decision trees
which are trained with a randomly selected subset of all features. RF has several
advantages: It is fast, robust to overﬁtting, and has only a few parameters to
setup. On the other side, the models are usually less interpretable, because the
good robustness is guaranteed only if a suﬃciently large number of trees (e.g.,
100) are created.
3.2
Complete Search for Primitive Rules
In [13], a method was proposed that uses a set of primitive fuzzy rules for music
genre classiﬁcation. Here, a primitive fuzzy rule is deﬁned as If <feature X> is
<linguistic term T > then <genre C>. A measure was established to estimate
the relevance of a single primitive rule for a genre in an annotated training set:
R(C, X, T ) = P (X is T | C) · (1 − P (X is T ))
(1)
Feature values were assigned to linguistic terms like low, moderate, or high.
Firstly, the method generated every possible primitive rule for one genre. Sec-
ondly, the relevance was calculated for every rule. Finally, the rules were sorted
by relevance in descending order. This was done for every genre using a One-
vs-All scheme, i.e. a binary classiﬁcation of music pieces as either exclusively
belonging to a given genre or to other genres.38
F. Heerde et al.
To classify a piece of music, the m most relevant rules were estimated for
every genre. Then, this piece is assigned to a genre with the highest average
relevance of these rules.
3.3
Fuzzy Pattern Trees
Fuzzy Pattern Trees (FPTs) were introduced in [6]. Essentially, a FPT is a fuzzy
rule, whose premise is interpreted as a tree, in which fuzzy operators serve as
inner nodes and fuzzy statements as leafs. A class can be represented by one
FPT only.
In [10], a top-down deterministic algorithm for constructing fuzzy pattern
trees was introduced. They also presented other stopping criteria in [11], as
well as a faster, yet nondeterministic version of the algorithm. Here, we use the
deterministic method with the stopping criteria from [11].
Basically, the algorithm keeps track of one rule M∗ that is extended incre-
mentally. It initializes M∗ by selecting the fuzzy statement with the smallest
error rate on a training set T . In each iteration, M∗ gets extended. A tree gets
extended by replacing one leaf, i.e. a fuzzy statement, with a fuzzy operator that
has a new statement and the old leaf as a child. From all possible extensions that
do not result in a tree exceeding the maximum depth, the one with the smallest
error is selected. The algorithm terminates if every branch of M∗ has reached
the maximum depth or the error after the extension was higher than (1 + γ)
times the error before the extension, where γ is a parameter that speciﬁes by
how much the new M∗ is allowed to be worse than the last one.
As the error rate, the root mean squared error was used, just like in [11].
Consider a set T of tuples (x, y) that are constituted of a feature vector x and
the membership y of this vector to a class, expressed as 0 or 1. For a fuzzy pattern
tree M, the root mean squared error can be calculated as shown in Eq. 2. M(x)
denotes the output of the model when given the feature vector x, also as 0 or 1.


1 
2
(y − M(x))
(2)
mT (M) = 
N
(x,y)∈T
3.4
Evolutionary Approach
In [8], an evolutionary algorithm was developed to ﬁnd a rule base for a fuzzy
system. Its rules conclude the membership to another fuzzy set, e.g., “If feature1
is high then feature2 is low ”. One individual represents a rule base.
We adjusted this approach to ﬁt the purpose of music genre classiﬁcation.
Now, rules for classiﬁcation will be used, like “If feature1 is high then class3 ”.
First experiments have shown that it is beneﬁcial to train the rule base for one
genre at a time. After the algorithm terminates for each genre separately, the
best genre-speciﬁc rule bases are joined to form a rule base that covers every
genre. Consequently, one individual represents a set of rules for one genre.Comparing Fuzzy Rule Based Approaches for Music Genre Classiﬁcation
39
To evaluate the quality of an individual M, the root mean squared error is
calculated and subtracted from 1, as shown in Eq. 3. In this case, the individual
M is a set of rules and the degree of truth of every of its rules M ∈ M can be
calculated separately by inputting a feature vector x: M(x).


2


1 
1 
(3)
fT (M) = 1 − 
(M(x))
y−
N
|M|
(x,y)∈T
M∈M
Procedure. We consider four parameters for this algorithm: the population size
#pop , the initial number of rules per individual #rule , the number of generations
genmax , and the last parameter to control the complexity of random premises
drule . This procedure starts for each genre separately.
First, the population gets initialized with #pop random individuals. One indi-
vidual consists of #rule rules with randomly generated premises for the current
genre. In each generation, the algorithm iterates over every individual in the
current population. The individual will be either recombined or mutated. Thus,
only one probability is needed to decide between mutation and recombination.
For recombination, the algorithm selects a second individual via the roulette
method, where the probability for an individual to be picked is proportional to
its ﬁtness. The new population will be selected from the old population and all
newly generated individuals. Following [8], the last step in each generation is to
linearly reduce the recombination probability in such a way that it equals 20%
for the last generation. Consequently, the mutation probability reaches 80% at
last.
Generating Random Premises. The process of generating random premises
from [8] interprets premises as trees just like the FPTs described in Subsect. 3.3.
It constructs a random premise top-down. With a ﬁxed probability of drule , a
random fuzzy operator is inserted into the root of the tree. Otherwise, a random
fuzzy statement is composed and inserted. If a fuzzy operator was chosen, the
same procedure begins for both children that are connected with the operator.
Having a ﬁxed probability for every layer of the tree has the disadvantage of the
tree’s depth being unbound. If drule is too low, most of the generated premises
will be primitive. If it is too high, the emerged trees will be too huge and less
interpretable.
Since we wanted to bound the trees’ depth, we decided to change this aspect.
Instead of having a ﬁxed probability for inserts in every layer, it is reduced by
25% per layer. drule deﬁnes the probability on the top layer. Thus, the depths
of the trees are limited since the probability reaches zero at some point. Other
reduction schedules are also possible but were not part of our experiments, e.g.
multiplying the probability with a number <1 per layer.
For example, when using drule = 0.5, 50% of the generated premises are prim-
itive on average while the other half contain at least one operator. In these cases,
the children of the root will be operators with the reduced probability of 25%.40
F. Heerde et al.
Figure 1 shows an example for a randomly generated tree and the probabilities
to select a fuzzy operator for each layer.
Fig. 1. Example for a randomly generated premise with drule = 0.5.
Mutation and Recombination. Both the mutation and recombination oper-
ator are implemented after [8].
Mutation consists of three diﬀerent actions that are applied to one individual:
– Delete mutation: Deletes a random rule from the set.
– Insert mutation: Inserts a new randomly generated rule into the set.
– Rule mutation: Selects a rule from the set randomly and replaces a randomly
selected subtree with a new randomly generated one.
Recombination is used to mix two individuals. Firstly, a random matching
of the rules from the ﬁrst individual to the rules of the second individual is
calculated. For this purpose, the rules of each individual are permuted randomly.
In the newly acquired order, pairs of rules are built by picking the rules from
the individuals that share the same position. If one individual has more rules
than the other, the remaining rules are matched with randomly chosen rules of
the other individual. Thereby, every rule is part of at least one pair. Secondly,
the rules of each pair are interpreted as a tree to perform a subtree crossover.
Lastly, all mixed pairs are divided to form two set of rules again. These sets
are the children of the recombination. Note that they have the same number of
rules.
4Experiments
4.1Setup
For the classiﬁcation of music pieces into genres, we use the publicly available
1517-Artists dataset1 , from which we selected a subset of 543 pieces of music that
were assigned to six genres with the labels Classical, Electronic and Dance, Hip-
Hop, Jazz, Rock and Pop, and R and B and Soul. The selection of the genres
is equivalent to the one from [13]. In this subset, each artist is represented by
exactly one track, to reduce the danger of learning the peculiarities of artists
instead of genres.
1
http://www.seyerlehner.info. Last accessed on 08.11.2019.Comparing Fuzzy Rule Based Approaches for Music Genre Classiﬁcation
41
In accordance with [12, pp. 138–142], we have extracted 245 semantically
understandable features from the audio recordings. An overview of feature groups
is provided in Fig. 2.
Fig. 2. Overview of all extracted features.
Then, we stored feature values for classiﬁcation time windows of 5 s with 2.5
s overlap. In order to use the same fuzzy sets for every single feature, the feature
values were normalized.
The data set was divided into ﬁve partitions for a 5-fold cross-validation, so
that 80% of tracks were used for training and 20% for validation in each of the
5 repetitions.
As a basis for our fuzzy approaches, we ﬁrst need to deﬁne the fuzzy sets
that are used for the fuzziﬁcation of the feature values. Following [13], we used
the same ﬁve linguistic terms and membership functions. They can be seen in
Fig. 3.
Fig. 3. Assignment of feature values to linguistic terms, originally from [13].
As described before, we obtained multiple feature vectors from each piece
of music which will be used to train and validate the diﬀerent approaches. By
implication, the resulting models classify only an individual classiﬁcation window
of 5 s length represented by its feature vector. To make a prediction for the42
F. Heerde et al.
whole piece, we output the genre which was predicted most often among all
classiﬁcation windows of the same piece.
As error rate, we use the balanced relative error, written down in Eq. 4, where
mT P,c and mF N,c are the numbers of true positives and false negatives for a class
c and |C| = 6 is the overall number of predicted genres.

mF N,c
1 
mBRE =
(4)
|C|
mT P,c + mF N,c
c∈C
The evolutionary algorithm and the random forest were trained 15 times for
each fold because of the nondeterministic behaviour of these methods. The com-
plete search and fuzzy pattern trees are deterministic in the way we implemented
them and hence, do not need repetition.
4.2
Results
Random Forest. We varied the number of trees between 100, 200, and 400.
Figure 4 shows the results of the evaluation. The errors are averaged across 15
statistical repetitions and 5 folds (15 · 5 = 75 values in total). Bold text indicates
the smallest error. Note, that the expected error of a completely random classiﬁer
would be equal to 0.83. As it can be observed, the error rates diﬀer only slightly,
and using 400 trees yielded the best results. In succeeding graphics, we use these
error rates as a baseline to compare with.
Fig. 4. Evaluation of random forest with 100, 200, and 400 trees.
Complete Search for Primitive Rules. Figure 5 plots the results of the
complete search for primitive rules. Since the method is deterministic, it was
executed only once for every fold. The error rate highly depends on m, the
number of most relevant rules that are used for classiﬁcation. When m is set
to a low value, too few rules are incorporated per genre to accurately represent
it, apparently. However, when a very high m such as 300 is used, not only the
interpretability of classiﬁcation models suﬀers, but also many less relevant rules
contribute to the model. They are equally weighted as the most relevant rules
and can therefore confuse the classiﬁer.Comparing Fuzzy Rule Based Approaches for Music Genre Classiﬁcation
43
0.6
mBRE
0.5
0.4
0.3
1
50
100
150
200
250
300
Fig. 5. Evaluation of the complete search for primitive rules when using the m most
relevant rules for classiﬁcation. The step size for m was 5. The solid line represents the
mean validation error while the dashed lines indicate the standard deviation added or
subtracted from it. The horizontal dotted line shows the validation error of the best
RF model for comparison.
The algorithms were tuned on the training sets. We obtained the lowest
training error and the lowest validation error of 39.77% for the same m = 30,
meaning that this setting is robust enough for diﬀerent data.
The 3 most relevant rules for the genre Jazz are shown in Fig. 6. Here, the
feature “Level of Activation High” indicates how likely a music piece animates
the listener. Please note that such semantic descriptors are often subjective by
their deﬁnition, with regard to expert annotations and to music tracks selected
to train a classiﬁer for the prediction of a descriptor. They even may be confusing
for some classiﬁcation tasks like identiﬁcation of speciﬁc Jazz subgenres. Just like
in this example, it was generally noticeable that most relevant rules referenced
either “very low ” or “very high”. The fuzzy sets “low ”, “moderate”, and “high”
appeared in more irrelevant rules.
Fig. 6. The 3 most relevant rules for the training set of the genre Jazz.
Fuzzy Pattern Trees. The approach for the FPTs featured only one param-
eter dmax to determine the maximum depth of the trees. We tried out dmax ∈
{1, 2, 3, 4, 5}, where dmax = 1 generates primitive FPTs, that consist of one fuzzy
statement only. Higher values for dmax were omitted because of too long training
time and inferior interpretability. Note, that the time was reduced drastically in44
F. Heerde et al.
[11] using various heuristics that rely on chance and thus, make the algorithm
nondeterministic. We opted for the deterministic approach to ease the imple-
mentation and evaluation. For future work, the nondeterministic version might
be a better solution.
The result of the FPT experiment can be seen in Fig. 7. We achieved the low-
est validation error of 36.15% with dmax = 5. This was also the best conﬁguration
when evaluated using the training sets, which is why this is the conﬁguration
that will be used for comparison.
mBRE
0.6
0.5
0.4
1
2
3
dmax
4
5
Fig. 7. Evaluation of the FPTs. The horizontal dotted line represents the validation
error of the best RF model.
In Fig. 8, a FPT is illustrated that was found for the genre Jazz and the
conﬁguration dmax = 3. Both statements with the features about moods were
found to be relevant by the complete search, too.
Fig. 8. The FPT built for the genre Jazz and dmax = 3.Comparing Fuzzy Rule Based Approaches for Music Genre Classiﬁcation
45
Interestingly, none of the FPTs used any of the negated operators nand, nor,
or navg. This might be explained by the way the FPTs are build. During a leaf
extension, it becomes one of the children of the newly inserted fuzzy operator.
Inserting a negated operator would reverse the positive impact the leaf holds in
the ﬁrst place. Thus, the algorithm does not select a negated operator.
Evolutionary Approach. For our evolutionary algorithm, there are parame-
ters to control the depth of the randomly created rules (drule ), the number of
generations (genmax ), the population size (#pop ), and the initial number of rules
in a rule base (#rule ). We used the same #pop of 100 like in [8]. The parameter
drule was set to 0.25, 0.5, and 0.75, to limit the rule depth to 2, 3, and 4. #rule
was set to 5, 10, and 15. Lastly, genmax needed to be determined. [8] used 80
generations. Since we modiﬁed their approach, this would be a good starting
point, but we also wanted to try out, whether more or less generations would
aﬀect the performance of the model. Therefore, we started the algorithm with
genmax ∈ {50, 80, 110}. As it turned out, the approach performed better with
more generations, and we started the last experiment with 140 generations. The
algorithm was executed 15 times for each conﬁguration.
The result of the last experiment can be seen in Fig. 9. Looking at the medi-
ans, the lowest validation error of 38.15% was achieved when setting #rule = 5
and drule = 0.5. The overall lowest validation error was 35.59%, using #rule = 10
and drule = 0.75.
When evaluating on the training sets, we obtained the best result with
#rule = 5 and drule = 0.25. This is the conﬁguration used for comparison.
When looking at the evolutionary generated rules like in Fig. 10, a few prob-
lems become noticeable. Firstly, the algorithm does not pay attention to the
complexity of the rules. Rules may be primitive like the ﬁrst one, or complex
like the second one. From generation to generation, they tend to become more
complex. Secondly, the structure of the second rule seems to be rather arbitrary.
Note, that the fuzzy statement “51 is not H ” appears three times in the same
rule. It is unlikely that this rule needed to be that long. Also, the part “217 is
not VH nor 51 is not H ” can be simpliﬁed to “217 is VH and 51 is H ”.
Altogether, the algorithm could beneﬁt from mechanisms to control the com-
plexity and construction of the rules. For future work, this can be taken into
account by modifying the approach to be multi-objective, where the error and
the complexity of the rules should be minimized at the same time.
Comparison of Four Approaches. For each classiﬁcation method, we deter-
mined the conﬁguration with the lowest training error as described in the pre-
vious sections. The chosen models were evaluated again on the validation sets,
which resulted in the multi-class validation errors summarized in Fig. 11. Over-
all, we obtained the lowest average validation error with random forest classiﬁer
(32.85%) followed by the fuzzy pattern trees (36.15%). Interestingly, the random
forest classiﬁer is not the best for every genre. The complete search method had46
F. Heerde et al.
0.42
#rule
mBRE
0.4
0.38
0.36
0.34
0.25
0.5
drule
0.75
Fig. 9. Evaluation of the evolutionary approach. The whiskers indicate the maximum
and minimum, the ends of the box mark the upper and lower quartile, and the middle
line stands for the median. The horizontal dotted line shows the validation error of the
best RF model.
Fig. 10. Two rules that appeared in the same rule base in one of the experiments.
The features referenced by their index to represent the rules shortened. 225: Mood
Reﬂective; 45, 51, 54: Share of Guitar (recognized with diﬀerent classiﬁers); 61: Share
of Piano; 217: Share of Strings
the highest average error rate (39.77%). Still, it exceeded all other methods for
the genre Jazz and the other fuzzy approaches for the genre Rock and Pop.
We also compared the algorithm performance by means of the Wilcoxon
signed test over categories and folds. The random forest classiﬁer performed
signiﬁcantly better than all fuzzy approaches (p = 0.0020 compared with the
complete search, p = 0.0324 with FPTs, and p = 0.0005 with EA). FPTs were
signiﬁcantly better than EA (p = 0.0432). The remaining pairs of algorithms
revealed no statistical diﬀerences.
Note, that we used the m = 30 most relevant rules from the complete search
to achieve this result. Since the examined rules were primitive, their premises
contained 30 fuzzy statements in total. The best model from the fuzzy pattern
trees used the parameter dmax = 5, which resulted in a complete tree containing
only 16 fuzzy statements. Contrary, the number of fuzzy statements used by the
evolutionary approach is not controlled in any way. Rules may be primitive or
highly complex.Comparing Fuzzy Rule Based Approaches for Music Genre Classiﬁcation
47
Fig. 11. The best validation errors of each method.
5
Conclusion
In this study, we tuned and compared three diﬀerent approaches for fuzzy rule
based classiﬁcation, one of which uses primitive fuzzy rules while the other two
use complex fuzzy rules. Our experiments on the classiﬁcation into six genres
showed that fuzzy rule based approaches are interesting alternatives for clas-
siﬁcation. However, their interpretability comes at the price of a higher error
rate. Fuzzy pattern trees outperformed the other fuzzy methods, with a bal-
anced validation error rate of 36.15% across all genres. Overall, we achieved the
best results with the baseline random forest classiﬁer (32.85%). Using fuzzy rule
based classiﬁers in combination with understandable features can make predic-
tions clearer for end users by revealing the rules and indicating their degree of
truth for a piece of music. In this scenario, they are more favorable to other
classiﬁers, even if they have a slightly higher validation error.
For future work, in particular the evolutionary approach has room for
improvements, as the complexity of the rules was not bound and their construc-
tion was uncontrolled. Incorporating these aspects would enforce well-structured
rules that may represent the genres better as well. For a fuzzy pattern tree app-
roach, the nondeterministic implementation can be investigated. Further, the
deﬁnition of linguistic terms can be done in other way than in Fig. 3.
References
1. Berlanga, F.J., del Jesus, M.J., Gacto, M.J., Herrera, F.: A genetic-programming-
based approach for the learning of compact fuzzy rule-based classiﬁcation systems.
In: Rutkowski, L., Tadeusiewicz, R., Zadeh, L.A., Żurada, J.M. (eds.) ICAISC
2006. LNCS (LNAI), vol. 4029, pp. 182–191. Springer, Heidelberg (2006). https://
doi.org/10.1007/11785231 20
2. Breiman, L.: Random forests. Mach. Learn. J. 45(1), 5–32 (2001)
3. Fernández, F., Chávez, F.: Fuzzy rule based system ensemble for music genre clas-
siﬁcation. In: Machado, P., Romero, J., Carballal, A. (eds.) EvoMUSART 2012.
LNCS, vol. 7247, pp. 84–95. Springer, Heidelberg (2012). https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-642-29142-5 848
F. Heerde et al.
4. Fernández, F., Chávez, F., Alcalá, R., Herrera, F.: Musical genre classiﬁcation by
means of fuzzy rule-based systems: a preliminary approach. In: Proceedings of the
IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computation, pp. 2571–2577 (2011)
5. Hoﬀmann, F.: Combining boosting and evolutionary algorithms for learning of
fuzzy classiﬁcation rules. Fuzzy Sets Syst. 141, 47–58 (2004). https://doi.org/10.
1016/S0165-0114(03)00113-1
6. Huang, Z., Gedeon, T.D., Nikravesh, M.: Pattern trees induction: a new machine
learning method. IEEE Trans. Fuzzy Syst. 16(4), 958–970 (2008). https://doi.org/
10.1109/TFUZZ.2008.924348
7. Kostek, B., Kaczmarek, A.: Music recommendation based on multidimensional
description and similarity measures. Fundam. Inform. 127(1–4), 325–340 (2013)
8. Linden, R., Bhaya, A.: Evolving fuzzy rules to model gene expression. Biosystems
88(1), 76–91 (2007). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biosystems.2006.04.006
9. Salamon, J., Rocha, B., Gómez, E.: Musical genre classiﬁcation using melody fea-
tures extracted from polyphonic music signals. In: 2012 IEEE International Con-
ference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 81–84 (2012).
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICASSP.2012.6287822
10. Senge, R., Hüllermeier, E.: Top-down induction of fuzzy pattern trees. IEEE Trans.
Fuzzy Syst. 19(2), 241–252 (2011). https://doi.org/10.1109/TFUZZ.2010.2093532
11. Senge, R., Hüllermeier, E.: Fast fuzzy pattern tree learning for classiﬁcation. IEEE
Trans. Fuzzy Syst. 23(6), 2024–2033 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1109/TFUZZ.
2015.2396078
12. Vatolkin, I.: Improving supervised music classiﬁcation by means of multi-objective
evolutionary feature selection. Ph.D. thesis, Department of Computer Science, TU
Dortmund (2013)
13. Vatolkin, I., Rudolph, G.: Interpretable music categorisation based on fuzzy rules
and high-level audio features. In: Lausen, B., Krolak-Schwerdt, S., Böhmer, M.
(eds.) Data Science, Learning by Latent Structures, and Knowledge Discovery.
SCDAKO, pp. 423–432. Springer, Heidelberg (2015). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-
3-662-44983-7 37
14. Yang, Y.H., Liu, C.C., Chen, H.H.: Music emotion classiﬁcation: a fuzzy approach.
In: Proceedings of the 14th ACM International Conference on Multimedia, pp.
81–84 (2006)
15. Zadeh, L.A.: Fuzzy sets. Inf. Control 8(3), 338–353 (1965). https://doi.org/10.
1016/S0019-9958(65)90241-X